What To Do
Our no-holds-barred list:
1. Start producing. Pick something of value; pick anything of
value; then start making or doing it. Show it to people who
might want it. Trade with them.
2. Walk away from TV. No... run away from TV. Watch a comedy
or a ball game now and then if you like, but get the rest of it
out of your life – it is a massive time waster and keeps your
mind tied to the system that just spat you out. Do NOT watch
the commercials.
3. Get the system out of your head. Don't be like the battered
woman who clings to her abuser no matter what – get the hell
away from the system and stop looking to it for images of
success and approval.
4. Make your own images of success. Approve of your own self.
5. Start reading books. Real books with real ideas in them. This is
education; schools are watered-down substitutes. And you
don't need their approval certificates; where have they gotten
you?
6. Get to know yourself. You are not “middle class.” You are not
“a citizen.” You are not suited to any single description. You
are a complex, unlimited person. Get to know YOU. Stop
looking for boxes to fit into. Stop looking for people to tell you
what you are.
7. Stop doing what other people expect you to do; do what you
think is right.
8. You have a functional mind and you have every right to use it
fully. Sure, it makes sense to get input from people with
something valuable to say, but consider everything yourself:
decide it's right; decide it's wrong; decide part is right and part
is wrong; but decide for yourself. All the time.
9. Do whatever works. You're already considered outcasts and
lost causes, so what do you have to lose?
10. Get copies of the (short-lived) TV show Firefly and the movie
Serenity. Watch them. Dramatics aside, these are people like
you.
11. Read the Bible. There may be no more thorough and
condensed set of ideas in the world. Believe if you think that is
right or don't believe if you think that is right, but read the
ideas in this book and make your own decisions about them.
Do NOT compare what you read with anything that a religious
person ever told you. Read the book itself.
12. If you have some expertise in something, teach it to others.
Hold informal lectures on economics, teach welding one
morning per week, take people for sailing lessons on
Saturdays, whatever. Pass-along what you know.
13. Protect each other. Let's be honest, most policemen won't
spend a lot of time protecting a tent city. Figure out how to
protect yourselves. Forget the system's laws and do what you
need to do. There are bad people out there and you have every
right to protect yourselves. (If you do happen to find a good
policeman, thank him and show him kindness.)
14. Remember, your rights do NOT come from the government.
Thomas Jefferson was right: they come from Nature and
Nature's God. Governments trash them more than they protect
them. You don't need an official to tell you what your rights
are.
15. Respect property. When people lose their property, they are
losing the part of their life that worked for it.
16. Forget “the news.” The very definition of news is “something
that almost never happens.” When something is so common
that it's no longer news (car crashes, IRS seizures, bogus
speeding tickets) that's when you should worry about it.
17. Get over any racial crap. It's what's inside people that matters,
not the outer layer of skin. If they behave well, you treat them
well. If they behave badly, you separate and protect. It doesn't
matter what kinds of feelings you have; we are not instinctdriven beasts, we are thinking humans. Were you mad that
welfare people got your money or that someone abused your
great grandfather? Fine, but blame the system that enforced the
crime and not someone who happens to have the same
complexion as a bad guy. They are individuals, the same as
you, and if you don't treat them as such, you are the barbarian.
18. Learn about the common law. Forget the law produced by
senators; learn about justice. That's what the common law was,
and it is useful.
19. Learn how to avoid the state. They will always want to steal
your production – that is what they do. Once you have
something again, they'll want it again. Don't go back to Egypt.
20. Cooperate with others and build whatever you need. It doesn't
matter what. Maybe, for example, you need a water supply. Get
together with everyone else and start developing ideas: Can
you get it from a nearby stream? Can you buy it from a
business? Do you need to tap into municipal lines? Decide
what is the right thing to do, then pay whatever the price may
be and do it.
21. Learn to play an instrument and make music with your friends.
It's a lot more rewarding than plugging into an iPod and
mindlessly bobbing your head for hours.
22. Less talk, more action. People often talk to delay actions they
fear. Ditch the endless arguments and do things.
23. Adapt, improvise, overcome.
24. Screw the rules – make your own.
